---
layout: post
title: Project 1
---

For project 1, I was assigned to work with a team to make a reccomendation to Women Tech Women Yes on which subway stations they should go to in order to get the most possible attendees to their annual gala on women in tech. The main source of data for this was turnstile data form the MTA for the New York City subway system. We also gathered location data for each station, and tried to find out more about the area surrounding each station to see how factors other than ridership might weigh in. We ended up using demographic data from the US Census Bureau (percentage women as well as education levels of the surroundign areas), location data for NYC tech companies, and location data for Universities in NYC. Stations with more women, more tech companies, more Universities, and higher levels of education were rated more likely to attract gala-goers. We used a weighted model based on a station's ranking in each category, with ridership, nerab tech, and percentage of women together making up the vast majority of the model.

One of the most challenging aspects of the project was the quality of the MTA data. I have worked with data sets with millions of entries before, but the data that I got at my previous job was usually very clean. The MTA data, however, was clearly not. The counts for entries were not actually counts, but cumulative numbers generated by the turnstile machines. The obvious choice was to simply take the difference over each time period, but every so often, the counters would reset and there would be an entry in the millions or billions. There were also several counters that counted backwards. 

Additionally, the data was not at all labeled very well. Each station was divided into "C/A's" (entrance areas/control areas), which were further divided into "units" (a machine of up to about 20 turnstiles), which were further divided into "SCP" (individual turnstiles). There was very little to no documentation to help in figuring out what these different units meant, which was very frustrating. Station names were also very hard to figure out, especially since I have no little experience in New York City. For example, there was one station named "14 ST." However, upon consulting the NYC subway map, there is no such station. There are two station on 14th street, one at 14th/Lexington, and one on 14th/Colombus. There were many times where I had to go on google maps and look up every station on a street, and then see which ones of that were in my data set. In the example above, luckilt "14 ST/Lexington AVE" was also a station in my data set, so I was able to determine that "14 ST" must mean 14th and Colombus. That part of the process was by far the most annoying. 

Another notable aspect of the project was the teamwork aspect. I believe that my group worked very well together, and we all became much closer over the week spent working on the project. However, there were some times where the project would get bottlenecked on us waiting on one section of code to finish so that we could all move on. This would sometimes be worsened by all three of us trying to code at one computer (something I don't think works very well for any group of three). Overall, however, it was great working with my team. We worked especially well together at brainstorming ideas of what other data sets besides the MTA to integrate, keeping up with deadlines that we set for ourselves so that bottlenecks were quite rare, and in divided up the work well (perhaps the most important part).

Overall it was a fun project, and I look forward to the remaining 11 weeks that I have here at Metis (1 week down). I am especially looking forward to using machine learning.  


